This is a timeline of the race riots in USA in 1919.
It is not a breakdown of all the events in 1919 in America.
We'll come back to that.
That timeline of events, the race riots, it became known as the Red Summer.
So let's just go through those events.
February to May.
On the 8th of February, Georgia, Blakely.
14th of March, Tennessee, Memphis.
10th of April, West Virginia, Morgan County.
13th of April, Georgia, Jenkins County.
10th of May, South Carolina, Charleston.
And then back in Georgia on the 10th of May in Sylvester.
29th of May, Connecticut, New London.
And then back in Georgia on the 29th of May in Putnam County.
The riots were to continue.
And so was the loss of life, lynching, etc.
We'll be more descriptive about that when we look at individual events.
But in June 19, there was the 13th of June, Tennessee, in Memphis.
On the 27th of June, Tennessee, in Annapolis.
And then on the 27th of June again, Mississippi, Macon.
Then in July, it was a tragically busy month.
The 5th, Pennsylvania, Scranton.
On the 6th, back again in Georgia, Dublin.
The 7th, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
The 8th, Pennsylvania, Coatesville.
On the 9th, Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
The 10th, Texas, Longview.
A town inhabited by black people that was destroyed and the mayor burnt.
The 11th of May, July.
Maryland, Baltimore.
The 15th, back in Texas, Port Arthur.
And on the 19th, in the capital, Washington, D.C.
Still in July, the 23rd, Louisiana, New Orleans.
The 23rd again, Pennsylvania, Derby.
The 26th, back in Alabama, Hobson City.
On the 27th, eight days, an armed resistance by black people.
Illinois, Chicago.
The 28th, South Carolina, Newbury.
The 31st, Illinois, Bloomington, New York.
Syracuse, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Again.
August to October, when our list of the events ends.
6th of August, back in Texas, for Texarkana.
21st of August, New York.
Once again, armed resistance.
28th of August, Nebraska, Omaha.
The 15th of September, South Carolina, Ellerton.
And on the 1st of October, Arkansas, Elaine.
And Maryland, Baltimore.
If you look at the headlines for that time period,
the mourning world herald, mob in Omaha,
Lynch's Negro Attempts to Hang Mayor Smith.
Chicago, three dead, 50 hurt in race riots on Chicago Bathing Beach.
The Rock Island, Argus, in West Illinois.
Omaha has Wild Night under mob.
Negro Burned Mayor Hanged.
The New Orleans states,
John Hartfield will be lynched by Ellsville mob
at 5 o'clock this afternoon.
3,000 mob will burn Negro.
That's in advance of the event.
Lynched by Florida mob, Negro's body riddled with bullets
found on tree by passes by Lake City, November 29th.
Now the American policy in 1919 hardly was likely
to encourage an end to these events.
President Wilson saw Bolshevism as a mistake
that had to be resisted and corrected.
He had two main priorities in 1919.
One, to create what we now call the United Nations.
And two, to end the Iraq War.
He believed the revolution in Russia was worse than anything
represented by the Kaiser.
And that the Bolsheviks were, quote,
a group of men more cruel than the Tsar himself.
A communist regime meant, according to Wilson,
government by terror, government by force,
not government by vote.
Furthermore, it ruled by the poison of disorder,
the poison of revolt, the poison of the revolution.
As a result, the poison of revolt, the poison of chaos.
It was, the president believed, the negation of everything
that is American and had to be opposed.
Let's step back to one of those remarks.
The Bolsheviks were a group of men more cruel
than the Tsar himself.
That's some admission, in case of who you're supporting.
The Secretary of State, Bainbridge Colby,
wrote that the US policy was based on the premise
that the present rulers of Russia do not rule
by the will or the consent of any considerable portion
of the Russian people.
The Bolsheviks had falsely seized power and were using,
quote, the machinery of government with savage oppression
to maintain themselves in power.
Moreover, the, quote, existing regime in Russia
is based upon the negation of every principle of honor
and good faith and every usage and convention
underlying the whole structure of international law.
It was therefore not possible for the government
of the United States to recognize the present rulers of Russia.
And the Americans were involved in the Russian Civil War.
The North Russia Expeditionary Force,
also known as the Polar Bear Expedition,
sent approximately 8,000 personnel from the US Army,
including the 310th Engineers, the 339th Infantry,
the 337th Field Hospital, and its ambulance company.
Also the 167th and 168th Railroad Companies,
which were sent to Mermenst
to operate the Mermenst to Petrograd Line.
The US Navy sent the cruiser USS Olympia
during August and September,
including 53 personnel who were attached to British units.
Now Woodrow Wilson, the president,
said much about black people during the time.
It is important to know where he comes from.
He was a southern president.
His family historically were involved in the Civil War
on the Confederate side.
During his first time in office, he passed a law,
that was in 1912, the law was passed
making racial intermarriage a felony
in the District of Columbia, Washington.
His new postmaster general also ordered
that his Washington offices be segregated
with the Treasury and Navy soon doing the same.
Suddenly photographs were required
for all applicants for federal jobs.
And when pressed by Black leaders, Wilson replied,
the purpose of these measures was to reduce the friction.
It is as far as possible from being a movement
against the Negroes.
I sincerely believe it to be in their interests.
Now the main organ of control in many people's view
was the FBI and the press.
During the Chicago riots,
the press learned from the Department of Justice
officials that the international workers and Bolsheviks
were, quote, spreading propaganda to breed race hatred.
The FBI reported that leftist views
were winning converts in the Black community
and that the NAACP was urging color people
to incest upon equality with white people
and to resort to force if necessary.
J. Edgar Hoover, who was a lower grade officer
at that time in the FBI,
analyzed the riots for the attorney general.
He blamed the July Washington, D.C. riots
on numerous assaults committed by Negroes upon white women.
We, of course, heard this before.
For the October event in Arkansas,
he blamed certain local agitation in a Negro lodge.
A more general cause, he cited,
was propaganda of a radical nature.
He charged that socialists were feeding propaganda
to Black-owned magazines such as The Messenger,
which in turn aroused their Black leaders.
On November 17, the attorney general A. Mitchell Palmer
reported to Congress on the threat that anarchists
and Bolsheviks posed to the government.
Identifying radicalism in the Black community
and the open defiance Black leaders advocated
in response to racial violence in the summer's rioting.
It faulted the leadership of the Bolsheviks
for an ill-governed reaction towards race-riding.
In all discussions of recent race riots against Blacks,
there is reflected the note of pride
that a Negro has found himself, that he has fought back,
that never again will he tamely submit
to violence and intimidation.
It described the dangerous spirit of defiance
and vengeance of work amongst Negroes.
Now, President Woodrow Wilson was born in Staunton, Virginia,
and he spent his early years in Augusta, Georgia, Columbia,
and South Carolina.
So all across the United States in 1919,
there was a reign of terror against Black people,
the result in thousands of injured and dead people.
The war was a war of the people,
and the war was a war of the people.
And as we move forward, we will tell the individual stories
of many of those cities and towns
and the nature of the riots.
This was the home of another nation
that saw the threat of Bolshevism and communism
as its major threat going forward.
However, in America, the president saw Blacks
as being likely breeding grounds of the evil of revolution.
Rather than simply riots, victims of the white mob.
This is Jamie Baker, HDA Cardiff.
Please listen to the following poem.
If We Must Die is the poem that makes me a poet
among colored Americans.
If we must die, let it not be like hogs
hunted and penned in an igloo
while round us bark the mad and hungry dogs
making their mock at our accursed lot.
If we must die, oh, let us nobly die
so that our precious blood may not be shed in vain.
Then even the monsters we defy
shall be constrained to honor us though dead.
Oh, kinsmen, we must meet the common people
though far outnumbered, let us show us brave
and for the thousand blows deal one death blow.
What though before us lies the open grave?
Like men, we'll face the murderers cowardly pack
pressed to the wall, dying but fatally.